notes/python.md, before:

- [pandas](#pandas)
  - [Print without breaking rows/columns](#print-without-breaking-rowscolumns)
  - [Replace NaN in one column with value from corresponding row of second column](#replace-nan-in-one-column-with-value-from-corresponding-row-of-second-column)
  - [Identify rows with NaN values](#identify-rows-with-nan-values)
  - [Conditionally replace values](#conditionally-replace-values)
  - [Remove columns](#remove-columns)
  - [Splitting column into multiple columns](#splitting-column-into-multiple-columns)
  - [Extract strings by position into new column](#extract-strings-by-position-into-new-column)
  - [Dataframe in percentage](#dataframe-in-percentage)
  - [Sorting multilevel dataframe (pivot table)](#sorting-multilevel-dataframe-pivot-table)
  - [Adding new column with mapped value from a dictionary](#adding-new-column-with-mapped-value-from-a-dictionary)
  - [Make dictionary from Pandas columns](#make-dictionary-from-pandas-columns)
  - [Convert dataframe to file object](#convert-dataframe-to-file-object)
  - [Rename column name](#rename-column-name)
  - [Ignore commented lines when reading files](#ignore-commented-lines-when-reading-files)
  - [Reading massive files in chunks](#reading-massive-files-in-chunks)
  - [Checking if item is NaN or not:](#checking-if-item-is-nan-or-not)
- [Charts](#charts)
  - [Creating reproducible charts](#creating-reproducible-charts)
  - [Why use fig, ax = plt.subplots():](#why-use-fig-ax--pltsubplots)
  - [Change figure parameters globally for all figures in a script](#change-figure-parameters-globally-for-all-figures-in-a-script)
  - [Legends for chart with two Y-axes](#legends-for-chart-with-two-y-axes)
  - [Force axis tick labels to be integers](#force-axis-tick-labels-to-be-integers)
  - [xticks and xtick_labels](#xticks-and-xticklabels)
  - [importing matplotlib in cluster](#importing-matplotlib-in-cluster)
  - [Axis in exponential format](#axis-in-exponential-format)
  - [Legend positioning without crowding](#legend-positioning-without-crowding)
  - [constrained_layout](#constrainedlayout)
- [logging](#logging)
  - [Boilerplate using `colorlog`](#boilerplate-using-colorlog)
  - [Using `fileConfig`](#using-fileconfig)
    - [logging in modules](#logging-in-modules)
  - [Capturing stack traces](#capturing-stack-traces)
- [Virtual environment](#virtual-environment)
  - [pipenv](#pipenv)
    - [Jupyter notebook](#jupyter-notebook)
- [pytest](#pytest)
  - [Avoiding .pyc files created when running pytest](#avoiding-pyc-files-created-when-running-pytest)
  - [Disable per-test capturing](#disable-per-test-capturing)
  - [Parametrizing test functions](#parametrizing-test-functions)
  - [Coverage](#coverage)
- [temp files/dir](#temp-filesdir)


# pandas

## Print without breaking rows/columns

```py
import pandas as pd
pd.set_option('display.height', 1000)
pd.set_option('display.max_rows', 500)
pd.set_option('display.max_columns', 500)
pd.set_option('display.width', 10000)
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/11711637/3998252).


## Replace NaN in one column with value from corresponding row of second column

```py
df['colA'].fillna(df['colB'], inplace=True)
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/29177664/3998252)


## Identify rows with NaN values

```py
df[df['a'].isnull()]
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/38368514/3998252)


## Conditionally replace values

```py
# Method 1; See https://stackoverflow.com/a/21608417/3998252
df.ix[df['A'] > 20000, 'A'] = 0

# Method 2; See https://stackoverflow.com/a/19913845/3998252
import numpy as np
df['A'] = np.where(df['B']=='Z', 1, 0)

# Method 3; See https://stackoverflow.com/a/31173785/3998252
df['A'] = [1' if x == 'Z' else 0 for x in df['B']]
```


## Remove columns
```py
# to get into a new dataframe
df = df.drop('column_name', axis=1)
 
# to remove it inplace
df.drop('column_name', axis=1, inplace=True)
```
[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/18145399/3998252)


## Splitting column into multiple columns

```py
# create a df
> df = pd.DataFrame(data={'aaa':['a 2 3','b 6 7 8']})
> df
       aaa
0    a 2 3
1  b 6 7 8
 
# to keep 1 item in a column and store remaining in another column
> df['x'], df['y'] = df['aaa'].str.split(' ', 1).str
> df[['x', 'y']]
   x      y
0  a    2 3
1  b  6 7 8
 
# split column into multiple columns by a delimiter
> df = df['aaa'].str.split(' ', expand=True)
> df
   0  1  2     3
0  a  2  3  None
1  b  6  7     8
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/39358924/3998252)


## Extract strings by position into new column

```py
data_pd['new_col'] = data_pd['col_X'].str[:1]
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20970328/3998252)


## Dataframe in percentage

```py
# if by row
df.apply(lambda  x: x / x.sum() * 100, axis=1)
 
# if by column
df.apply(lambda  x: x / x.sum() * 100, axis=0)
```


## Sorting multilevel dataframe (pivot table)

```py
    Group1    Group2
    A B C     A B C
1   1 0 3     2 5 7
2   5 6 9     1 0 0
3   7 0 2     0 3 5
 
# Sorted by column 'C' of 'Group1'. They need to be in a TUPLE.
df.sort([('Group1', 'C')], ascending=False)
 
  Group1       Group2     
       A  B  C      A  B  C
2      5  6  9      1  0  0
1      1  0  3      2  5  7
3      7  0  2      0  3  5
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/14734148/3998252)


## Adding new column with mapped value from a dictionary

```py
df["col_2"] = df["col_1"].map(dict_name)
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/24216489/3998252)

If desired to replace existing column with dictionary value:
df.replace({"col_1": dict_name})

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20250996/3998252)


## Make dictionary from Pandas columns

```py
# works only if 1:1 key to value pairing
dict_name = df.set_index('key_col')['value_col'].to_dict()
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/18695700/3998252)


## Convert dataframe to file object

```py
from cStringIO import StringIO
 
xx = StringIO()
data_pd.to_csv(xx, index=False, sep='\t')
xx.seek(0)  # this is important; position set to the beginning
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/38213524/3998252)


## Rename column name

```py
df2 = df.rename(columns={'old_name' : 'new_name'})
 
# in-place
df2.rename(columns={'old_name' : 'new_name'}, inplace = True)
```


## Ignore commented lines when reading files
Set comment='#' when using pd.read_csv


## Reading massive files in chunks

Use `iterator` option for iterating file in chunks

```py
chunksize= 10**6
for df in pd.read_csv('filename.gz',sep='\t', header=None, chunksize=chunksize, iterator=True):
    print df[0].value_counts()
```

[See here for more info on this](http://pythondata.com/working-large-csv-files-python/).


## Checking if item is NaN or not:

```py
# using numpy
numpy.isnan(item)   # item can't be string dtype
 
# using math
math.isnan(item)    # item can't be string dtype
 
# using pandas
pandas.isnull(item) # allows string dtype
```


# Charts

## Creating reproducible charts

http://www.jesshamrick.com/2016/04/13/reproducible-plots/


## Why use fig, ax = plt.subplots():

[See here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/34162641/3998252)


## Change figure parameters globally for all figures in a script

[See this](http://stackoverflow.com/a/38251497/3998252).
See this page for parameters that can be modified -http://matplotlib.org/users/customizing.html.


## Legends for chart with two Y-axes

```py
fig, ax1 = plt.subplots()   # primary
ax2 = ax1.twinx()   # for second y-axis

ax1.bar(x,y)
ax2.bar(x,y)

# for legend
plots1, labels1 = ax.get_legend_handles_labels()
plots2, labels2 = ax2.get_legend_handles_labels()
ax1.legend(plots1 + plots2, labels1 + labels2)
```

[Source](http://stackoverflow.com/a/10129461/3998252)


## Force axis tick labels to be integers

```py
from matplotlib.ticker import MaxNLocator
....
ax.yaxis.set_major_locator(MaxNLocator(integer=True))
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/38096332/3998252)
[Documentation](https://matplotlib.org/api/ticker_api.html#matplotlib.ticker.MaxNLocator)


## xticks and xtick_labels

```py
ax.set_xticks(x_axis)
ax.set_xticklabels(x_labels, rotation=45, ha='right')

# when using seaborn where x_labels were preset, for example-seaborn
ax.set_xticklabels(ax.get_xticklabels(), rotation=45, ha='right')
```


## importing matplotlib in cluster

```py
import matplotlib as mpl
mpl.use('Agg')
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/13336944/3998252)


## Axis in exponential format

```py
ax.ticklabel_format(style='sci', axis='y', scilimits=(0, 0))
```


## Legend positioning without crowding

Method 1 (Preferred):

```py
lgd = ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(0., -0.3, 1., .102), loc=3, ncol=3, mode="expand", borderaxespad=0.)
fig.savefig('a.png', bbox_extra_artists=(lgd,), bbox_inches='tight')
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/10154763/3998252)

Method 2:

```py
# Shrink current axis by 20%; to accomodate legends.
box = ax.get_position()
ax.set_position([box.x0, box.y0, box.width * 0.85, box.height])
    
# change 'bbox_to_anchor' for legend positions
handles, labels = ax.get_legend_handles_labels()
ax.legend(handles, labels, loc='center left', bbox_to_anchor=(1, 0.5))
```


## constrained_layout

> constrained_layout automatically adjusts subplots and decorations like legends and colorbars so that they fit in the figure window while still preserving, as best they can, the logical layout requested by the user.

**Warning**: Constrained Layout is experimental for matplot v3

```py
plt.subplots(constrained_layout=True)
```

[Source](https://matplotlib.org/tutorials/intermediate/constrainedlayout_guide.html)


# logging

## Boilerplate using `colorlog`

[`colorlog`](https://github.com/borntyping/python-colorlog) makes logs colorful and works across OS platforms.

```py
import colorlog

logger = colorlog.getLogger(__name__)  
logger.setLevel(colorlog.colorlog.logging.DEBUG)  

handler = colorlog.StreamHandler()
handler.setFormatter(colorlog.ColoredFormatter(
		"%(log_color)s%(asctime)s %(name)s %(levelname)-8s %(message)s",
		datefmt="%m-%d-%y %H:%M:%S"))
logger.addHandler(handler)
```

Why use `__name__`?
> The name of the logger corresponding to the __name__ variable is logged as __main__, which is the name Python assigns to the module where execution starts. If this file is imported by some other module, then the __name__ variable would correspond to its name logging_example. Here’s how it would look:
[Source](https://realpython.com/python-logging/)


Levels available example:
```py
logger.debug("Debug message")
logger.info("Information message")
logger.warning("Warning message")
logger.error("Error message")
logger.critical("Critical message")
```

## Using `fileConfig`

Setup config file 

```ini
[loggers]
keys=root

[logger_root]
handlers=stream
level=DEBUG

[formatters]
keys=color

[formatter_color]
class=colorlog.ColoredFormatter
format=%(log_color)s%(asctime)s %(name)-12s %(levelname)-8s%(reset)s %(message)s
datefmt=%m-%d-%y %H:%M:%S

[handlers]
keys=stream

[handler_stream]
class=StreamHandler
formatter=color
args=(sys.stdout,)
```

Use this config in script as below. Note that, in this implementation, 
`colorlog` will be imported as config file uses `colorlog` formatter.

```py
import logging.config
logging.config.fileConfig('config.ini', disable_existing_loggers=False)
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)
```

### logging in modules

Above config based setup works for multiple modules as well.
Example: 

*Module file:* `xxx.py`

```py
import logging.config
logging.config.fileConfig('config.ini', disable_existing_loggers=False)
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

def xxx():
    logger.info('info msg')
    logger.warning('warning msg')
    return None

if __name__ == '__main__':
    xxx()
```

*Main file:* `main.py`

```py
import xxx
import logging.config
logging.config.fileConfig('config.ini', disable_existing_loggers=False)
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

def main():
    logger.info('main script message')
    xxx.xxx()
    return None


if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```
[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/15735146/3998252)


## Capturing stack traces

Use `exc_info=True` with `error` level.

```py
logging.error("Exception occurred", exc_info=True)
```

Shortcut for above:
```py
logging.exception("Exception occurred")
```


# Virtual environment

## pipenv

pipenv is the easiest way to manage virtual environment as it automates several easy-to-forget-but-required steps. It requires Python 3 installedthough.

a. Creating new/fresh virtual environment

```py
cd project_dir
 
# to initiate pipenv virtual env
pipenv install
 
# to install required packages
pipenv install [packages]
 
# **IMPORTANT** To LOCK pipfile with EXACT version info
pipenv lock
 
# activate virtual environment
pipenv shell
 
# exit virtual environment
exit
```

b. Recreating virtual environment from Pipfile
```py
# installs all packages from Pipfile
pipenv install
 
# activate virtual environment
pipenv shell
 
# exit virtual environment
exit
```

c. Opening existing pipenv project

```py
cd project_dir
 
# activate virtual environment
pipenv shell
 
# exit virtual environment
exit
```

d. Remove virtual environment
```py
cd <project_dir>
pipenv --rm
```

e. Simply running a python script with pipenv without spawning a new shell

```py
pipenv run python script.py
```
 

### Jupyter notebook

Running jupyter notebook under pipenv is possible. See [jupyter_notebook.md](jupyter_notebook.md##in-virtual-environment-mode)

# pytest

pytest can't seem to handle if file to tested has its name starting with a number. For example, filename '1_liftover_hg38_to_hg19.py' caused trouble and then was changed to 'a_liftover_hg38_to_hg19.py'. This is probably due to importing module with number as first letter causing issues.


## Avoiding .pyc files created when running pytest

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/154443/how-to-avoid-pyc-files/154617#154617

Can be done via terminal or programmatically.


## Disable per-test capturing

Use -s switch.

pytest -s

 
## Parametrizing test functions

https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/parametrize.html

Example:

```py
import pytest
@pytest.mark.parametrize("test_input,expected", [
    ("3+5", 8),
    ("2+4", 6),
    ("6*9", 42),
])
def test_eval(test_input, expected):
    assert eval(test_input) == expected
```
 
## Coverage

https://pytest-cov.readthedocs.io/en/latest/readme.html#id1

Simple execution:
`py.test --cov=myproj tests/`

Generate reports:
`py.test --cov-report term --cov=myproj tests/`

--cov-report takes values html, xml, term and annotate


# temp files/dir

[Built-in module `tempfile`](https://docs.python.org/2/library/tempfile.html) helps to easily manage temp files/dirs. They will get deleted automatically when the script exits, unless mentioned otherwise.  They can be named or unnamed.

Example:
```py
import tempfile

tmp = tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile()

# Open the file for writing. NOTICE calling 'tmp.name' instead of just `tmp'. 
with open(tmp.name, 'w') as f:
    f.write(stuff) # where `stuff` is, y'know... stuff to write (a string)

...

# Open the file for reading. NOTICE calling 'tmp.name' instead of just `tmp'
with open(tmp.name) as f:
    for line in f:
        ... # more things here
```

Commit message:

ignore 3rd party library logs

notes/python.md, after:

- [pandas](#pandas)
  - [Print without breaking rows/columns](#print-without-breaking-rowscolumns)
  - [Replace NaN in one column with value from corresponding row of second column](#replace-nan-in-one-column-with-value-from-corresponding-row-of-second-column)
  - [Identify rows with NaN values](#identify-rows-with-nan-values)
  - [Conditionally replace values](#conditionally-replace-values)
  - [Remove columns](#remove-columns)
  - [Splitting column into multiple columns](#splitting-column-into-multiple-columns)
  - [Extract strings by position into new column](#extract-strings-by-position-into-new-column)
  - [Dataframe in percentage](#dataframe-in-percentage)
  - [Sorting multilevel dataframe (pivot table)](#sorting-multilevel-dataframe-pivot-table)
  - [Adding new column with mapped value from a dictionary](#adding-new-column-with-mapped-value-from-a-dictionary)
  - [Make dictionary from Pandas columns](#make-dictionary-from-pandas-columns)
  - [Convert dataframe to file object](#convert-dataframe-to-file-object)
  - [Rename column name](#rename-column-name)
  - [Ignore commented lines when reading files](#ignore-commented-lines-when-reading-files)
  - [Reading massive files in chunks](#reading-massive-files-in-chunks)
  - [Checking if item is NaN or not:](#checking-if-item-is-nan-or-not)
- [Charts](#charts)
  - [Creating reproducible charts](#creating-reproducible-charts)
  - [Why use fig, ax = plt.subplots():](#why-use-fig-ax--pltsubplots)
  - [Change figure parameters globally for all figures in a script](#change-figure-parameters-globally-for-all-figures-in-a-script)
  - [Legends for chart with two Y-axes](#legends-for-chart-with-two-y-axes)
  - [Force axis tick labels to be integers](#force-axis-tick-labels-to-be-integers)
  - [xticks and xtick_labels](#xticks-and-xticklabels)
  - [importing matplotlib in cluster](#importing-matplotlib-in-cluster)
  - [Axis in exponential format](#axis-in-exponential-format)
  - [Legend positioning without crowding](#legend-positioning-without-crowding)
  - [constrained_layout](#constrainedlayout)
- [logging](#logging)
  - [Boilerplate using `colorlog`](#boilerplate-using-colorlog)
  - [Using `fileConfig`](#using-fileconfig)
    - [logging in modules](#logging-in-modules)
  - [Disable logs from specific libraries](#disable-logs-from-specific-libraries)
  - [Capturing stack traces](#capturing-stack-traces)
- [Virtual environment](#virtual-environment)
  - [pipenv](#pipenv)
    - [Jupyter notebook](#jupyter-notebook)
- [pytest](#pytest)
  - [Avoiding .pyc files created when running pytest](#avoiding-pyc-files-created-when-running-pytest)
  - [Disable per-test capturing](#disable-per-test-capturing)
  - [Parametrizing test functions](#parametrizing-test-functions)
  - [Coverage](#coverage)
- [temp files/dir](#temp-filesdir)


# pandas

## Print without breaking rows/columns

```py
import pandas as pd
pd.set_option('display.height', 1000)
pd.set_option('display.max_rows', 500)
pd.set_option('display.max_columns', 500)
pd.set_option('display.width', 10000)
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/11711637/3998252).


## Replace NaN in one column with value from corresponding row of second column

```py
df['colA'].fillna(df['colB'], inplace=True)
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/29177664/3998252)


## Identify rows with NaN values

```py
df[df['a'].isnull()]
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/38368514/3998252)


## Conditionally replace values

```py
# Method 1; See https://stackoverflow.com/a/21608417/3998252
df.ix[df['A'] > 20000, 'A'] = 0

# Method 2; See https://stackoverflow.com/a/19913845/3998252
import numpy as np
df['A'] = np.where(df['B']=='Z', 1, 0)

# Method 3; See https://stackoverflow.com/a/31173785/3998252
df['A'] = [1' if x == 'Z' else 0 for x in df['B']]
```


## Remove columns
```py
# to get into a new dataframe
df = df.drop('column_name', axis=1)
 
# to remove it inplace
df.drop('column_name', axis=1, inplace=True)
```
[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/18145399/3998252)


## Splitting column into multiple columns

```py
# create a df
> df = pd.DataFrame(data={'aaa':['a 2 3','b 6 7 8']})
> df
       aaa
0    a 2 3
1  b 6 7 8
 
# to keep 1 item in a column and store remaining in another column
> df['x'], df['y'] = df['aaa'].str.split(' ', 1).str
> df[['x', 'y']]
   x      y
0  a    2 3
1  b  6 7 8
 
# split column into multiple columns by a delimiter
> df = df['aaa'].str.split(' ', expand=True)
> df
   0  1  2     3
0  a  2  3  None
1  b  6  7     8
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/39358924/3998252)


## Extract strings by position into new column

```py
data_pd['new_col'] = data_pd['col_X'].str[:1]
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20970328/3998252)


## Dataframe in percentage

```py
# if by row
df.apply(lambda  x: x / x.sum() * 100, axis=1)
 
# if by column
df.apply(lambda  x: x / x.sum() * 100, axis=0)
```


## Sorting multilevel dataframe (pivot table)

```py
    Group1    Group2
    A B C     A B C
1   1 0 3     2 5 7
2   5 6 9     1 0 0
3   7 0 2     0 3 5
 
# Sorted by column 'C' of 'Group1'. They need to be in a TUPLE.
df.sort([('Group1', 'C')], ascending=False)
 
  Group1       Group2     
       A  B  C      A  B  C
2      5  6  9      1  0  0
1      1  0  3      2  5  7
3      7  0  2      0  3  5
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/14734148/3998252)


## Adding new column with mapped value from a dictionary

```py
df["col_2"] = df["col_1"].map(dict_name)
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/24216489/3998252)

If desired to replace existing column with dictionary value:
df.replace({"col_1": dict_name})

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20250996/3998252)


## Make dictionary from Pandas columns

```py
# works only if 1:1 key to value pairing
dict_name = df.set_index('key_col')['value_col'].to_dict()
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/18695700/3998252)


## Convert dataframe to file object

```py
from cStringIO import StringIO
 
xx = StringIO()
data_pd.to_csv(xx, index=False, sep='\t')
xx.seek(0)  # this is important; position set to the beginning
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/38213524/3998252)


## Rename column name

```py
df2 = df.rename(columns={'old_name' : 'new_name'})
 
# in-place
df2.rename(columns={'old_name' : 'new_name'}, inplace = True)
```


## Ignore commented lines when reading files
Set comment='#' when using pd.read_csv


## Reading massive files in chunks

Use `iterator` option for iterating file in chunks

```py
chunksize= 10**6
for df in pd.read_csv('filename.gz',sep='\t', header=None, chunksize=chunksize, iterator=True):
    print df[0].value_counts()
```

[See here for more info on this](http://pythondata.com/working-large-csv-files-python/).


## Checking if item is NaN or not:

```py
# using numpy
numpy.isnan(item)   # item can't be string dtype
 
# using math
math.isnan(item)    # item can't be string dtype
 
# using pandas
pandas.isnull(item) # allows string dtype
```


# Charts

## Creating reproducible charts

http://www.jesshamrick.com/2016/04/13/reproducible-plots/


## Why use fig, ax = plt.subplots():

[See here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/34162641/3998252)


## Change figure parameters globally for all figures in a script

[See this](http://stackoverflow.com/a/38251497/3998252).
See this page for parameters that can be modified -http://matplotlib.org/users/customizing.html.


## Legends for chart with two Y-axes

```py
fig, ax1 = plt.subplots()   # primary
ax2 = ax1.twinx()   # for second y-axis

ax1.bar(x,y)
ax2.bar(x,y)

# for legend
plots1, labels1 = ax.get_legend_handles_labels()
plots2, labels2 = ax2.get_legend_handles_labels()
ax1.legend(plots1 + plots2, labels1 + labels2)
```

[Source](http://stackoverflow.com/a/10129461/3998252)


## Force axis tick labels to be integers

```py
from matplotlib.ticker import MaxNLocator
....
ax.yaxis.set_major_locator(MaxNLocator(integer=True))
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/38096332/3998252)
[Documentation](https://matplotlib.org/api/ticker_api.html#matplotlib.ticker.MaxNLocator)


## xticks and xtick_labels

```py
ax.set_xticks(x_axis)
ax.set_xticklabels(x_labels, rotation=45, ha='right')

# when using seaborn where x_labels were preset, for example-seaborn
ax.set_xticklabels(ax.get_xticklabels(), rotation=45, ha='right')
```


## importing matplotlib in cluster

```py
import matplotlib as mpl
mpl.use('Agg')
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/13336944/3998252)


## Axis in exponential format

```py
ax.ticklabel_format(style='sci', axis='y', scilimits=(0, 0))
```


## Legend positioning without crowding

Method 1 (Preferred):

```py
lgd = ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(0., -0.3, 1., .102), loc=3, ncol=3, mode="expand", borderaxespad=0.)
fig.savefig('a.png', bbox_extra_artists=(lgd,), bbox_inches='tight')
```

[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/10154763/3998252)

Method 2:

```py
# Shrink current axis by 20%; to accomodate legends.
box = ax.get_position()
ax.set_position([box.x0, box.y0, box.width * 0.85, box.height])
    
# change 'bbox_to_anchor' for legend positions
handles, labels = ax.get_legend_handles_labels()
ax.legend(handles, labels, loc='center left', bbox_to_anchor=(1, 0.5))
```


## constrained_layout

> constrained_layout automatically adjusts subplots and decorations like legends and colorbars so that they fit in the figure window while still preserving, as best they can, the logical layout requested by the user.

**Warning**: Constrained Layout is experimental for matplot v3

```py
plt.subplots(constrained_layout=True)
```

[Source](https://matplotlib.org/tutorials/intermediate/constrainedlayout_guide.html)


# logging

## Boilerplate using `colorlog`

[`colorlog`](https://github.com/borntyping/python-colorlog) makes logs colorful and works across OS platforms.

```py
import colorlog

logger = colorlog.getLogger(__name__)  
logger.setLevel(colorlog.colorlog.logging.DEBUG)  

handler = colorlog.StreamHandler()
handler.setFormatter(colorlog.ColoredFormatter(
		"%(log_color)s%(asctime)s %(name)s %(levelname)-8s %(message)s",
		datefmt="%m-%d-%y %H:%M:%S"))
logger.addHandler(handler)
```

Why use `__name__`?
> The name of the logger corresponding to the __name__ variable is logged as __main__, which is the name Python assigns to the module where execution starts. If this file is imported by some other module, then the __name__ variable would correspond to its name logging_example. Here’s how it would look:
[Source](https://realpython.com/python-logging/)


Levels available example:
```py
logger.debug("Debug message")
logger.info("Information message")
logger.warning("Warning message")
logger.error("Error message")
logger.critical("Critical message")
```

## Using `fileConfig`

Setup config file 

```ini
[loggers]
keys=root

[logger_root]
handlers=stream
level=DEBUG

[formatters]
keys=color

[formatter_color]
class=colorlog.ColoredFormatter
format=%(log_color)s%(asctime)s %(name)-12s %(levelname)-8s%(reset)s %(message)s
datefmt=%m-%d-%y %H:%M:%S

[handlers]
keys=stream

[handler_stream]
class=StreamHandler
formatter=color
args=(sys.stdout,)
```

Use this config in script as below. Note that, in this implementation, 
`colorlog` will be imported as config file uses `colorlog` formatter.

```py
import logging.config
logging.config.fileConfig('config.ini', disable_existing_loggers=False)
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)
```

### logging in modules

Above config based setup works for multiple modules as well.
Example: 

*Module file:* `xxx.py`

```py
import logging.config
logging.config.fileConfig('config.ini', disable_existing_loggers=False)
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

def xxx():
    logger.info('info msg')
    logger.warning('warning msg')
    return None

if __name__ == '__main__':
    xxx()
```

*Main file:* `main.py`

```py
import xxx
import logging.config
logging.config.fileConfig('config.ini', disable_existing_loggers=False)
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

def main():
    logger.info('main script message')
    xxx.xxx()
    return None


if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```
[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/15735146/3998252)


## Disable logs from specific libraries

When logging in debug mode, logs from some third party python libraries (eg.: matplotlib, requests)
are also produced. To turn them off:

```py
# Add this code after code for logging config
logging.getLogger('matplotlib').setLevel(logging.WARNING)
```
[Source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/51529172/3998252)


## Capturing stack traces

Use `exc_info=True` with `error` level.

```py
logging.error("Exception occurred", exc_info=True)
```

Shortcut for above:
```py
logging.exception("Exception occurred")
```


# Virtual environment

## pipenv

pipenv is the easiest way to manage virtual environment as it automates several easy-to-forget-but-required steps. It requires Python 3 installedthough.

a. Creating new/fresh virtual environment

```py
cd project_dir
 
# to initiate pipenv virtual env
pipenv install
 
# to install required packages
pipenv install [packages]
 
# **IMPORTANT** To LOCK pipfile with EXACT version info
pipenv lock
 
# activate virtual environment
pipenv shell
 
# exit virtual environment
exit
```

b. Recreating virtual environment from Pipfile
```py
# installs all packages from Pipfile
pipenv install
 
# activate virtual environment
pipenv shell
 
# exit virtual environment
exit
```

c. Opening existing pipenv project

```py
cd project_dir
 
# activate virtual environment
pipenv shell
 
# exit virtual environment
exit
```

d. Remove virtual environment
```py
cd <project_dir>
pipenv --rm
```

e. Simply running a python script with pipenv without spawning a new shell

```py
pipenv run python script.py
```
 

### Jupyter notebook

Running jupyter notebook under pipenv is possible. See [jupyter_notebook.md](jupyter_notebook.md##in-virtual-environment-mode)

# pytest

pytest can't seem to handle if file to tested has its name starting with a number. For example, filename '1_liftover_hg38_to_hg19.py' caused trouble and then was changed to 'a_liftover_hg38_to_hg19.py'. This is probably due to importing module with number as first letter causing issues.


## Avoiding .pyc files created when running pytest

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/154443/how-to-avoid-pyc-files/154617#154617

Can be done via terminal or programmatically.


## Disable per-test capturing

Use -s switch.

pytest -s

 
## Parametrizing test functions

https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/parametrize.html

Example:

```py
import pytest
@pytest.mark.parametrize("test_input,expected", [
    ("3+5", 8),
    ("2+4", 6),
    ("6*9", 42),
])
def test_eval(test_input, expected):
    assert eval(test_input) == expected
```
 
## Coverage

https://pytest-cov.readthedocs.io/en/latest/readme.html#id1

Simple execution:
`py.test --cov=myproj tests/`

Generate reports:
`py.test --cov-report term --cov=myproj tests/`

--cov-report takes values html, xml, term and annotate


# temp files/dir

[Built-in module `tempfile`](https://docs.python.org/2/library/tempfile.html) helps to easily manage temp files/dirs. They will get deleted automatically when the script exits, unless mentioned otherwise.  They can be named or unnamed.

Example:
```py
import tempfile

tmp = tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile()

# Open the file for writing. NOTICE calling 'tmp.name' instead of just `tmp'. 
with open(tmp.name, 'w') as f:
    f.write(stuff) # where `stuff` is, y'know... stuff to write (a string)

...

# Open the file for reading. NOTICE calling 'tmp.name' instead of just `tmp'
with open(tmp.name) as f:
    for line in f:
        ... # more things here
```
